Transcriber: Sofía García Lienhard
Reviewer: Zsuzsanna Lőrincz
The most astounding place I've ever been
is the Mosquitia rainforest in Honduras.
I've done archaeological fieldwork
all over the world,
so I thought I knew what to expect
venturing into the jungle,
but I was wrong -
for the first time in my life,
I might add.
(Laughter)
First of all, it's freezing.
It's 90 degrees,
but you're soaking wet
from the humidity,
and the canopy of trees is so thick
that sunlight never reaches the surface.
You can't get dry.
Immediately,
I knew that I hadn't brought
enough clothing.
That first night,
I kept feeling things moving
underneath my hammock,
unknown creatures brushing and poking
against the thin nylon fabric.
And I could barely sleep
through all the noise.
The jungle is loud.
It's shockingly loud.
It's like being downtown
in a bustling city.
As the night wore on,
I became increasingly frustrated
with my sleeplessness,
knowing I had a full day ahead.
When I finally got up at dawn,
my sense of unseen things
was all too real.
There were hoofprints, paw prints,
linear snake tracks everywhere.
And what's even more shocking,
we saw those same animals in the daylight,
and they were completely unafraid of us.
They had no experience with people.
They had no reason to be afraid.
As I walked towards the undocumented city,
my reason for being there,
I realized that this was the only place
that I'd ever been
where I didn't see
a single shred of plastic.
That's how remote it was.
Perhaps it's surprising to learn
that there are still places on our planet
that are so untouched by people,
but it's true.
There are still hundreds of places
where people haven't stepped
for centuries,
or maybe forever.
It's an awesome time
to be an archaeologist.
We have the tools and the technology
to understand our planet
like never before.
And yet we're running out of time.
The climate crisis threatens to destroy
our ecological and cultural patrimony.
I feel an urgency to my work
that I didn't feel 20 years ago.
How can we document everything
before it's too late?
I was trained
as a traditional archaeologist
using methodologies
that have been around since the '50s.
That all changed in July of 2009
in Michoacán, Mexico.
I was studying the ancient
Purépecha empire,
which is a lesser known
but equally important
contemporary of the Aztec.
Two weeks earlier,
my team had documented
an unknown settlement,
so we were painstakingly mapping
building foundations by hand -
hundreds of them.
Basic archaeological protocol
is to find the edge of a settlement
so you know
what you're dealing with.
And my graduate students
convinced me to do just that.
So I grabbed a couple of CLIF Bars,
some water, a walkie,
and I set out alone on foot,
expecting to encounter the edge
in just a few minutes.
A few minutes passed,
and then an hour.
Finally, I reached
the other side of the malpais.
Oh, there were ancient
building foundations all the way across.
It's a city? Oh, shit.
(Laughter)
It's a city.
Turns out that this
seemingly small settlement
was actually an ancient urban megalopolis,
26 square kilometers in size,
with as many building foundations
as modern-day Manhattan,
an archaeological settlement so large
that it would take me decades
to survey fully,
the entire rest of my career,
which was exactly how I didn't want
to spend the entire rest of my career ...
(Laughter)
sweating, exhausted,
placating stressed-out
graduate students ...
(Laughter)
tossing scraps of PB&J sandwiches
to feral dogs,
which is pointless, by the way,
because Mexican dogs
really don't like peanut butter.
(Laughter)
Just the thought of it bored me to tears.
So I returned home to Colorado,
and I poked my head
through a colleague's door.
Dude! There's got to be a better way!
He asked if I had heard
of this new technology called LiDAR -
Light Detection and Ranging.
I looked it up.
LiDAR involves shooting
a dense grid of laser pulses
from an airplane to the ground's surface.
What you end up with
is a high resolution scan
of the earth's surface
and everything on it.
It's not an image,
but instead it's a dense,
three dimensional plot of points.
We had enough money in to scan,
so we did just that.
The company went to Mexico,
they flew the LiDAR,
and they sent back the data.
Over the next several months,
I learned to practice
digital deforestation,
filtering away trees, brush
and other vegetation
to reveal the ancient
cultural landscape below.
When I looked at my first visualization,
I began to cry,
which I know comes
as quite a shock to you
given how manly I must seem.
(Laughter)
In just 45 minutes of flying,
the LiDAR had collected
the same amount of data
as what would have taken decades by hand:
every house foundation, building,
road and pyramid, incredible detail,
representing the lives
of thousands of people
who lived and loved and died
in these spaces.
And what's more, the quality of the data
wasn't comparable to traditional
archaeological research.
It was much, much better.
I knew that this technology
would change the entire field
of archaeology in the coming years.
And it did.
Our work came to the attention
of a group of filmmakers
who were searching
for a legendary lost city in Honduras.
They failed in their quest,
but they instead
documented an unknown culture
now buried under a pristine
wilderness rainforest,
using LiDAR.
I agreed to help interpret their data,
which is how I found myself
deep in that Mosquitia jungle,
plastic-free and filled
with curious animals.
Our goal was to verify
that the archaeological features
we identified in our LiDAR
were actually there on the ground,
and they were.
Eleven months later, I returned
with a crack team of archaeologists,
sponsored by
the National Geographic Society
and the Honduran government.
In a month, we excavated over 400 objects
from what we now call
the City of the Jaguar.
We felt a moral and ethical responsibility
to protect the site as it was,
but in the short time that we were there,
things inevitably changed.
The tiny gravel bar
where we first landed our helicopter
was gone.
The brush had been cleared away
and the trees were moved
to create a large landing zone
for several helicopters at once.
Without it, after just one rainy season,
the ancient canals
that we had seen in our LiDAR scan
were damaged or destroyed.
And the Eden I described
soon had a large clearing, central camp,
lights and an outdoor chapel.
In other words,
despite our best efforts
to protect the site as it was,
things changed.
Our initial LiDAR scan
of this City of the Jaguar
is the only record of this place
as it existed just a few years ago.
And broadly speaking,
this is a problem for archaeologists.
We can't study an area
without changing it somehow,
and regardless, the earth is changing.
Archaeological sites are destroyed,
history is lost.
Just this year, we watched in horror
as the Notre Dame Cathedral
went up in flames.
The iconic spire collapsed,
and the roof was all but destroyed.
Miraculously,
the art historian Andrew Tallon
and colleagues
scanned the cathedral in 2010 using LiDAR.
At the time, their goal was to understand
how the building was constructed.
Now, their LiDAR scan
is the most comprehensive record
of the cathedral,
and it will prove invaluable
in the reconstruction.
They couldn't have anticipated the fire
or how their scan would be used,
but we are lucky to have it.
We take for granted that our cultural
and ecological patrimony
will be around forever.
It won't.
Organizations like SCI-Arc
and Virtual Wonders
are doing incredible work to record
the world's historic monuments,
but nothing similar exists
for the earth's landscapes.
We've lost 50 percent of our rainforest.
We lose 18 million acres
of forest every year.
And rising sea levels will make cities,
countries and continents
completely unrecognizable.
Unless we have a record of these places,
no one in the future
will know they existed.
If the earth is the Titanic,
we've struck the iceberg,
everyone's on deck,
and the orchestra is playing.
The climate crisis threatens to destroy
our cultural and ecological patrimony
within decades.
But sitting on our hands
and doing nothing is not an option.
Shouldn't we save everything
we can on the lifeboats?
(Applause)
Looking at my scans
from Honduras and Mexico,
it's clear that we need
to scan, scan, scan
now as much as possible,
while we still can.
That's what inspired the Earth Archive,
an unprecedented scientific effort
to LiDAR-scan the entire planet,
starting with areas
that are most threatened.
Its purpose is threefold.
Number one:
create a baseline record
of the earth as it exists today
to more effectively mitigate
the climate crisis.
To measure change,
you need two sets of data:
a before and an after.
Right now, we don't have
a high-resolution before-data set
for much of the planet,
so we can't measure change,
and we can't evaluate
which of our current efforts
to combat the climate crisis
are making a positive impact.
Number two:
create a virtual planet
so that any number of scientists
can study our earth today.
Archaeologists like me
can look for undocumented settlements.
Ecologists can study tree size,
forest composition and age.
Geologists can study hydrology,
faults, disturbance.
The possibilities are endless.
Number three:
preserve a record of the planet
for our grandchildren's grandchildren
so they can reconstruct and study
lost cultural patrimony in the future.
As science and technology advance,
they'll apply new tools, algorithms,
even AI to LiDAR scans done today
and ask questions
that we can't currently conceive of.
Like Notre Dame, we can't imagine
how these records will be used,
but we know that they'll be
critically important.
The Earth Archive is the ultimate gift
to future generations.
Because the truth be told,
I won't live long enough
to see its full impact
and neither will you.
That's exactly why it's worth doing.
The Earth Archive is a bet
on the future of humanity.
It's a bet that together, collectively,
as people and as scientists,
that we'll face the climate crisis,
and that we'll choose
to do the right thing,
not just for us today,
but to honor those who came before us
and to pay it forward
to future generations
who will carry on our legacy.
Thank you.
(Applause)